bush commnad 
Using nano
nano is a user-friendly text editor that's easy for beginners.
nano filename.txt
To save changes: Press Ctrl + O, then Enter.
To exit: Press Ctrl + X.


Using vim
vim is a more powerful editor with a steeper learning curve.
vim filename.txt
To enter insert mode: Press i.
To save changes: Press Esc, then type :w and press Enter.
To exit: Press Esc, then type :q and press Enter.
To save and exit: Press Esc, then type :wq and press Enter.

open in Notepad
Notepad filename.txt
start chrome



The terminal offers several benefits, especially for developers, system administrators, and power users. Here’s why many people prefer using the terminal for various tasks:
1. Efficiency and Speed
Direct command execution for faster task completion.
Ability to automate repetitive tasks with scripts.
2. Greater Control and Flexibility
Advanced control over system internals.
Highly customizable with aliases and configuration options.
3. Remote Access
Manage remote servers securely via SSH.
Easier collaboration and remote management for cloud services.
4. Resource Efficiency
Low resource usage compared to graphical applications.
Ideal for older systems or minimal setups.
5. Scripting and Automation
Shell scripting for complex, automated tasks.
Task scheduling with tools like cron for timed execution.
6. Cross-Platform Compatibility
Consistent commands across Unix-based systems (Linux, macOS).
Easier portability of code between environments.
7. Learning and Debugging
Helps users understand OS structure and operations.
Powerful tools (grep, top, tail, etc.) for troubleshooting.
8. Developer and Power User Tools
Better version control with Git on the command line.
Quick software installation and management with package managers.
9. Security
Detailed permission management and control.
Less vulnerable to certain types of GUI exploits.
Using the terminal can boost productivity and provide powerful tools for managing and understanding your system.





window basic command 
Displays the contents of a directory.
dir


Creates a new directory (folder).
mkdir NewFolder


Deletes an empty directory.
rmdir OldFolder


To delete a folder and its contents:
rmdir /S /Q OldFolder
/S removes all files and subdirectories.
/Q suppresses confirmation prompts.


Deletes a specified file.
del filename.txt


To delete all files in a folder:
del /Q *
/Q suppresses the confirmation prompt.



Copies files from one location to another.
copy C:\source\file.txt C:\destination\


6. copy – Copy Files
Copies files from one location to another.
copy C:\source\file.txt C:\destination\

Copy multiple files:
copy *.txt C:\destination\


7. move – Move Files
Moves files from one location to another.
move C:\source\file.txt C:\destination\



8. ren – Rename Files or Directories
Renames a file or directory.
ren oldname.txt newname.txt



9. cls – Clear Screen
Clears all text in the Command Prompt window.
cls



10. ipconfig – Display IP Configuration
Shows network information, including IP address and subnet mask.
ipconfig


To display detailed information:
ipconfig /all


11. ping – Test Network Connection
Tests the connection to a specific IP address or domain.
ping www.google.com


12. shutdown – Shut Down or Restart the Computer
To shut down:
shutdown /s /t 0
/s for shutdown.
/t 0 sets the timer to 0 seconds.
To restart:
shutdown /r /t 0



13. tasklist – List Running Processes
Shows a list of currently running processes.
tasklist

14. taskkill – Terminate a Process
Ends a specified process.
taskkill /IM notepad.exe /F
/IM specifies the image name of the process.
/F forces the process to terminate.


15. echo – Display Messages or Variables
Prints text or variables to the screen.

echo Hello, World!

16. type – Display File Contents
Shows the contents of a text file.
type filename.txt

17. find – Search for a String in Files
Searches for a specific text in a file.
find "search_text" filename.txt
Select-String -Path "lab.py" -Pattern "one"

Select-String: Searches for text in a file or input.
-Path: Specifies the file you want to search in.
-Pattern: Specifies the string you want to find.



18. systeminfo – Display System Information
Shows detailed information about the computer.
systeminfo


19. chkdsk – Check Disk
Checks and repairs file system errors on a disk.
chkdsk C:

20. help – Get Help on Commands
Displays a list of available commands or help for a specific command.
help
Help for a specific command:
help dir



These commands are foundational for navigating and managing files, folders, and system settings directly from the Windows command line.


